# Workshop 2: Summarising and Describing Data

**Aims:**

-   Practice importing a .csv data file into RStudio using `read_csv()`

-   Practice inspecting your data in RStudio.

-   Calculate mean and standard deviation using the `group_by()` and `summarise()` functions.

-   Visually inspect data using plots and describe data distributions.

## Exercise 1: Import the Data

**Import the Data File:** `sleep.csv`

Before you begin, you will need the tidyverse package loaded.

``` r
install.packages("tidyverse") #install tidyverse if you do not have it.
library(tidyverse) #loads tidyverse.
```

Next import the data file and store it as an object called `dataset`.

``` r
dataset <- read_csv("sleep.csv")
```

If you see an error saying cannot find function `read_csv()` this usually means you have not loaded (or installed) the tidyverse package.

## Exercise 2: Inspect or Check Your Data

**Take a look at your newly imported data file**

Check the top right panel (the environment) and also use the code below to inspect your data set.

``` r
view(dataset) # this will open the data in a new tab.
names(dataset) # this will show the variable names.
```

It is really important to look at the variable names as you'll be using them in code later on.

## Exercise 3: Calculate the Total Sleep Score

**Sometimes we might want to compute new scores or variables**

Add up the two sleep scores `sleep_quality` and `drowsy` scores for to create an overall score called `total_sleep`.

``` r
mydata <- dataset %>%
  mutate(total_sleep = scale_1 + scale_2)
```

This code will:

-   Create an object called `mydata` before using the original `dataset` and then...

-   Use the `mutate()` function to create a new variable named `total_sleep` which should equal `=` `scale_1` `+` `scale_2`.

View the data set and look for the new column to see it has worked.

``` r
view(mydata)
```

## Exercise 4: Calculate Descriptive Statistics

Just as shown in the lecture, use the code below to calculate the mean and standard deviation for `total_sleep`. Remember, we want to use the total score calculated in exercise 3, and not to use the two subscales.

``` r
desc <-  mydata %>%
  group_by(NULL) %>%
  summarise(m_sleep = mean(NULL),
            sd_sleep = sd(NULL))
```

You will need to change `NULL` to match your data set. Try and give this a go on your own first, but if you aren't sure look below for help.

Think about:

-   What is the name of the variable you will split the data file by (e.g., what is the grouping variable/independent variable called in the data set)

-   What is the name of the score that you want to find the mean and standard deviation for (e.g., what is the dependent variable called in the data set)

<details>

<summary>👀 Click for a hint</summary>

``` r
desc <-  mydata %>%
  group_by(energy_drink) %>%
  summarise(m_sleep = mean(total_sleep),
            sd_sleep = sd(total_sleep))
```

</details>

## Exercise 5: Explore Data with Plots

Generate a box plot:

``` r
ggplot(mydata, aes(x = energy_drink, y = total_sleep)) +
  geom_boxplot(width = .4)
```

Generate histograms:

``` r
ggplot(mydata, aes(x = total_sleep, fill = energy_drink)) +
  geom_histogram(colour = "black") +
  facet_wrap(~ energy_drink)
```

Generate density plots:

``` r
ggplot(mydata, aes(x = total_sleep, fill = energy_drink)) +
  geom_density(alpha = .5) +
  facet_wrap(~ energy_drink)
```

## Exercise 6: What Does `facet_wrap()` do?

Re-run the density plot code, except this time delete the final line. This will show what `facet_wrap()` does. What do you notice about the plot now?

Use this code without `facet_wrap()`.

``` r
ggplot(mydata, aes(x = total_sleep, fill = energy_drink)) +
  geom_density(alpha = .5)
```

-----
**Well Done. You have reached the end of the workshop.**
-----
