# Workshop 2: Summarising and Describing Data

**Aims:**

-   Practice importing a .csv data file into RStudio using `read_csv()`

-   Practice inspecting your data in RStudio.

-   Calculate mean and standard deviation using the `group_by()` and `summarise()` functions.

-   Visually inspect data using plots and describe data distributions.

## Exercise 1: Import the Data

**Import the Data File:** `sleep.csv`

Before you begin, you will need the tidyverse package loaded.

``` r
install.packages("tidyverse") #install tidyverse if you do not have it.
library(tidyverse) #loads tidyverse.
```

Next import the data file and store it as an object called `dataset`.

``` r
dataset <- read_csv("sleep.csv")
```

If you see an error saying cannot find function `read_csv()` this usually means you have not loaded (or installed) the tidyverse package.

## Exercise 2: Inspect and Check Your Data

**Take a look at your newly imported data file**

Check the top right panel (the environment) and also use the code below to inspect your data set.

``` r
view(dataset) # this will open the data in a new tab.
names(dataset) # this will show the variable names.
```

It is really important to look at the variable names as you'll be using them in code later on.

## Exercise 3: Calculate the Total Sleep Score

**Sometimes we might want to compute new scores or variables**

Add up the two sleep scores `sleep_quality` and `drowsy` scores to create an overall score called `total_sleep`.

``` r
mydata <- dataset %>%
  mutate(total_sleep = scale_1 + scale_2)
```

This code will:

-   Create an object called `mydata` before using the original `dataset` and then...

-   Use the `mutate()` function to create a new variable named `total_sleep` which should equal `=` `scale_1` `+` `scale_2`.

View the data set and look for the new column to see it has worked.

``` r
view(mydata)
```
Answer questions 3.1-3.2 on the worksheet.

## Exercise 4: Calculate Descriptive Statistics

Just as shown in the lecture, use the code below to calculate the mean and standard deviation for `total_sleep`. Remember, we want to use the total score calculated in exercise 3, and not to use the two subscales.

``` r
desc <-  mydata %>%
  group_by(NULL) %>%
  summarise(m_sleep = mean(NULL),
            sd_sleep = sd(NULL))
```

You will need to change `NULL` to match your data set. Try and give this a go on your own first, but if you aren't sure look below for help.

Think about:

-   What is the name of the variable you will split the data file by (e.g., what is the grouping variable/independent variable called in the data set)

-   What is the name of the score that you want to find the mean and standard deviation for (e.g., what is the dependent variable called in the data set)

-----

<details>

<summary>👀 Click for a hint</summary>

``` r
desc <-  mydata %>%
  group_by(energy_drink) %>%
  summarise(m_sleep = mean(total_sleep),
            sd_sleep = sd(total_sleep))
```

</details>

-----

If you look in the environment (top right panel) you will see a new object called `desc`. This is where your descriptive statistics are stored. I called it `desc` but you can call it anything you like. It is best to keep object names short and informative. We can now view that object using the `view()` function.

```r
view(desc)
```

Answer questions 4.1-4.2 on the worksheet.

## Exercise 5: Explore Data with Plots

Generate a box plot:

``` r
ggplot(mydata, aes(x = energy_drink, y = total_sleep)) +
  geom_boxplot(width = .4)
```

Generate histograms:

``` r
ggplot(mydata, aes(x = total_sleep, fill = energy_drink)) +
  geom_histogram(colour = "black") +
  facet_wrap(~ energy_drink)
```

Generate density plots:

``` r
ggplot(mydata, aes(x = total_sleep, fill = energy_drink)) +
  geom_density(alpha = .5) +
  facet_wrap(~ energy_drink)
```

Answer questions 5.1-5.2 in the worksheet.

## Exercise 6: What Does `facet_wrap()` do?

Re-run the density plot code, except this time delete the final line. This will show what `facet_wrap()` does. What do you notice about the plot now?

Use this code without `facet_wrap()`.

``` r
ggplot(mydata, aes(x = total_sleep, fill = energy_drink)) +
  geom_density(alpha = .5)
```

Answer question 6.1 on the worksheet.

## Exercise 7: Save Your Amended Data File

**Your current data file has the `total_sleep` column in. You need to save it so you can use it for next week's workshop. You can overwrite you original .csv file using this code, which will save today's data set.

```r
write.csv(mydata, "sleep.csv")
```

This means the `sleep.csv` on your computer will be updated and ready to use next week! Make sure you know where it has saved on your computer before you leave. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Well Done. You have reached the end of the workshop.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------
